Picture/Image Optimisations - The DPR Problem (Part 1/?) (#3641)
guardian/dotcom-rendering: dotcom-rendering/docs/architecture/027-pictures.md

### Media queries (`media="query"`)

Within any given `<picture>` tag, you can have multiple `<source>` child elements. Using the `media` html attribute, which uses the same syntax as CSS media queries, you can tell the browser which `<source>` element to look for an image source in.

For example `<source media="min-width: 600px">` would tell the browser to pick this source if the viewport is 600px or wider.

The browser will choose and stick with the first matching source element it finds, so it's important to ensure they're in the DOM in the right order.

Another important media queries we use is (`(orientation: portrait)`) to check if it's a portrait device (e.g a smartphone).

### Sizes (`sizes=`)

The sizes html attribute acts as the translation layer between the size of the viewport and the size of the image source you'd like to pick. A good way to think about this is that, beyond a certain width, main media (inline) images never go beyond `620px` wide, and this html attribute gives us a way to communicate that to the browser.

> For example `<source sizes="(min-width: 660px) 620px, 100vw">` tells the browser, "Hey, if your viewport is 660px or wider, always look for an image source which is 620px wide. If not, default to an image which is the same width as 100% of the viewport width". We can provide as many sizes & queries as we want, with the `(query) px, (query) px, ... , px)` syntax, where the last argument without a query is the default if none others match.

Reviewer: Worth noting: it only makes sense to have multiple `sizes` if you have multiple `srcset`.

### Source Set (`srcset=`)

Source sets work as our final piece of the puzzle. Our browser has already picked a `source` element, and has used `sizes` to figure out what size (in width only) image it is looking for. Our source set allows us to provide a list of URLs & the width of the image for each one, which the browser will then use to look for the best fitting image from.

> Source sets are formatted like: `<source srcset="https://url.to/image 300w, https://url.to/larger/image 600w">` Our comma separated list of sources specifies first the URL to a given image source, then the width (where `w` is, from what I can tell just `px`) for that image. In our case where we use fastly image optimiser, the only thing changing between these image urls is in the query parameters, e.g `?width=300` and `?width=600`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Source sets are formatted like: `<source srcset="https://url.to/image 300w, https://url.to/larger/image 600w">` Our comma separated list of sources specifies first the URL to a given image source, then the real pixel width for that image. The unit `w` is used, to distinguish pixels inside the image from CCS `px` on the screen–there are many pixels per CSS `px` on high DPI screens. In our case where we use Fastly image optimiser, the only thing changing between these image urls is in the query parameters, e.g `?dpr=2`, or `?width=300` and `?width=600`.
```

```
# desiredWidth is the width of an image that the browser will look for in `srcset`
# size is the chosen size based off our queries in the `sizes` attribute
# DPR is the ration between CSS Pixels & device resolution (e.g 2, 3, 4)
desiredWidth = size * DPR
```

This posed a problem for us, because if we tell the browser "Hey choose a 620px image", and the browser has a DPR of say 3, it will actually look for an image source for 1860px, far higher resolution than is needed for the user to have a good experience.

#### The DPR Solution

This problem was first solved in Frontend, then replicated in DCR

Rather than having just 2 source elements, we instead have 2 source elements per breakpoint (one for high DPR, one for regular displays), and provide just one size & source set for that source element.

Lets look at a simplified example (with only 1 source per breakpoint):

```html

> <picture>
>     <source
>         media="min-width: 980px"
>         sizes="620px"
>         srcset="https://xxx.png?width=620px 620w"
>     />
>     <source
>         media="min-width: 660px"
>         sizes="620px"
>         srcset="https://xxx.png?width=620px 620w"
>     />
>     <source
>         media="min-width: 480px"
>         sizes="480px"
>         srcset="https://xxx.png?width=480px 480w"
>     />
>     <source
>         media="min-width: 375px"
>         sizes="420px"
>         srcset="https://xxx.png?width=420px 420w"
>     />
> </picture>

Reviewer: Having a `sizes` attribute if you have only one element in your `scrset` is redundant, and maybe a little confusing.

```suggestion
<picture>
    <source
        media="min-width: 980px"
        srcset="https://xxx.png?width=620px 620w"
    />
    <source
        media="min-width: 660px"
        srcset="https://xxx.png?width=620px 620w"
    />
    <source
        media="min-width: 480px"
        srcset="https://xxx.png?width=480px 480w"
    />
    <source
        media="min-width: 375px"
        srcset="https://xxx.png?width=420px 420w"
    />
</picture>
```

Author: Thanks! I have sorted this now :) Sizes begone!

    <source srcset="https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/picture.jpg?width=465&;quality=45&;auto=format&;fit=max&;dpr=2&; 930w" sizes="375px" media="(min-width: 375px) and (-webkit-min-device-pixel-ratio: 1.25), (min-width: 375px) and (min-resolution: 120dpi)">
    <source srcset="https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/picture.jpg?width=465&;quality=85&;auto=format&;fit=max&; 465w" sizes="375px" media="(min-width: 375px)">
    <source srcset="https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/picture.jpg?width=465&;quality=45&;auto=format&;fit=max&;dpr=2&; 930w" sizes="320px" media="(min-width: 320px) and (-webkit-min-device-pixel-ratio: 1.25), (min-width: 320px) and (min-resolution: 120dpi)">
    <source srcset="https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/picture.jpg?width=465&;quality=85&;auto=format&;fit=max&; 465w" sizes="320px" media="(min-width: 320px)">
    <source srcset="https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/picture.jpg?width=465&;quality=45&;auto=format&;fit=max&;dpr=2&; 930w" sizes="0px" media="(min-width: 0px) and (-webkit-min-device-pixel-ratio: 1.25), (min-width: 0px) and (min-resolution: 120dpi)">

>     <source srcset="https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/picture.jpg?width=465&;quality=85&;auto=format&;fit=max&; 465w" sizes="0px" media="(min-width: 0px)">

Reviewer: In these instances, we have a `size` value that’s ignored, and often not a ratio of the `w` present in the `srcset`. It’s also worth noting that sizes refer to the [_intrinsic size_][] of the image, not its CSS pixel size.

[_intrinsic size_]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Intrinsic_Size
